Tutorial - analyze survey results with ChatGPT (#7086)
PostHog/posthog.com: contents/tutorials/analyze-surveys-with-chatgpt.md

---
title: How to analyze surveys with ChatGPT

> date: 2023-10-18

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-11-02
```

author: ["lior-neu-ner"]
showTitle: true
sidebar: Docs
featuredImage: ../images/tutorials/banners/tutorial-14.png
tags: ['surveys']
---

[Surveys](/docs/surveys) are a great way of collecting feedback from your users, especially if you ask your users like "How can we improve our product?". However, they can be hard to analyze if you receive hundreds or more answers. Fortunately, [OpenAI's ChatGPT](https://openai.com/chatgpt) is great at doing this.

In this tutorial, we'll show you how to use ChatGPT to analyze your survey results. We'll create a basic Node.js script, parse a CSV of survey answers, and use the ChatGPT API to extract useful information such as sentiment and theme.

> > The completed code for this tutorial is available on [GitHub](https://github.com/PostHog/analyze-surveys-with-chatgpt)

Reviewer: Nice

## Creating a Node script

> First, make sure [Node is installed](https://nodejs.dev/en/learn/how-to-install-nodejs/) (18.16.0 or newer). Then create a `package.json` file by running `npm init`. Give your app a name and select the defaults for all the options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, make sure [Node is installed](https://nodejs.dev/en/learn/how-to-install-nodejs/) (18.16.0 or newer) then create a `package.json` file by running `npm init`. Give your app a name and select the defaults for all the options.
```

Then, create a new JavaScript file for our script (we name ours `survey-analyzer.js`):

```bash
npm init
touch survey-analyzer.js
```

Finally, add a placeholder function to your script. We'll add code to it in the next steps.

```js
// in survey-analyzer.js

const analyzeSurveyAnswers = async () => {
  // TODO: add code
}

analyzeSurveyAnswers()
```

> ## Parsing a CSV of survey answers

Reviewer: It would be really useful to know how to get a CSV from a PostHog survey. It is a bit confusing using a test CSV when you mention surveys to start.

Author: Added!

```js
// in survey-analyzer.js

const fs = require('fs');
const csv = require('csv-parser');

const csvToArr = async (filePath) => {
  const results = [];
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    fs.createReadStream(filePath)
      .pipe(csv({ headers: ['answer'] }))
      .on('data', data => results.push(data))
      .on('end', () => {
        resolve(results);
      })
      .on('error', error => {
        reject(error);
      });
  });
}

const analyzeSurveyAnswers = async () => {
  const surveyAnswers = await csvToArr('answers.csv')
}

analyzeSurveyAnswers()
```

## Analyzing answers with ChatGPT

The next step is to submit our answers to ChatGPT to analyze them. To do this, first you'll need to [sign up for an OpenAI account](https://platform.openai.com/signup) and [retrieve your API key](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/4936850-where-do-i-find-my-secret-api-key). 

Then, install [OpenAI's Node library ](https://github.com/openai/openai-node) and initialize it in the code. 

```bash
npm install openai
```

```js
// in survey-analyzer.js

const OpenAI = require("openai");

const openai = new OpenAI({
    apiKey: "<your-api-key>"
});

// rest of the code
```

> Next, for each survey answer, we'll make an API call to [Chat completions API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) to extract the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, for each survey answer, we'll make an API call to [chat completions API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) to extract the following information:
```

1. The sentiment of the answer i.e., is it positive or negative?

> 2. The theme of the answer.

Reviewer: i.e. here too for consistency?

Author: removed i.e from the first one now

To do so, the API method requires 2 parameters:

> - **[model](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/overview)** – which ChatGPT model to use. We use `gpt-3.5-turbo-16k` (we explain why later in this post).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [model](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/overview) – which OpenAI model to use. We use `gpt-3.5-turbo-16k` (we explain why later in this post).
```

> - [messages](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) – i.e., the task you are requesting ChatGPT to perform. You can find more details on the required format in the [API docs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [messages](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) – i.e., the task you are requesting the model to perform. You can find more details on the required format in the [API docs](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api).
```

    try {
      const result = await openai.chat.completions.create({
        model: "gpt-3.5-turbo-16k",
        messages: [
          {
            "role": "system", 
            "content": `Your job is to analyze survey answers. For each answer, extract the sentiment (positive or negative only) as well as the theme in the answer. 

              You must only respond with a JSON. This JSON must contain the keys "survey_answer", "sentiment", and "theme". 
              
              Here's an example of an valid answer: 
              \`\`\`
              {
                "survey_answer": "The product has potential, but it's not very intuitive to use. Please simplify the interface",
                "sentiment": "negative",
                "theme": "user interface"
              }
              \`\`\`
              `
          },
          {
            "role": "user", 
            "content": `Analyze this survey answer: ${JSON.stringify(surveyAnswer.answer)}`
          }
        ],
      });

      const analyzedAnswer = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);
    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
  }
}
```

> Finally, we'll save the answer from ChatGPT into a CSV file. This way we'll be able to analyze the results later:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, we'll save the answer from ChatGPT into a CSV file. This way we can analyze the results later:
```

```js
const analyzeSurveyAnswers = async () => {
    // rest of function code...

>       const analyzedAnswer = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);

Reviewer: Another (potentially dumb, feel free to ignore) idea, capturing these analyzed answers as a PostHog event? Creating some insights based on them in PostHog?

Reviewer: Then you could have percentage of positive versus negative, common themes as insights

      const csvLine = `"${analyzedAnswer.survey_answer}","${analyzedAnswer.sentiment}","${analyzedAnswer.theme}"\n`;
      fs.appendFile('analyzed_answers.csv', csvLine, (err) => {
        if (err) throw err;
        console.log('The analyzed answer was appended to file!');
      });
    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
  }
}
```

> If you now run `node survey-analyzer.js`, you should see your analyzed answers appear in your new CSV file! 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you now run `node survey-analyzer.js`, you should see your analyzed answers appear in your new CSV file.
```

## Batching our requests

> Since we submit each survey answer one at a time, it can be quite tedious to wait for the script to complete. To improve this, we can batch our survey answers so that multiple are analyzed at the same time. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we submit each survey answer one at a time, it can be quite tedious waiting for the script to complete. To improve this, we can batch our survey answers so we analyze multiple at the same time. 
```

However, an important consideration is that ChatGPT has something called a `token limit`:

A `token` can be thought of as roughly 4 characters or 0.75 words. When you make an API request, the text in the `messages` parameter is converted into tokens. The response from the API is then also converted into tokens. 

This means that the number of tokens in your API call is number tokens in your request plus the number of tokens in the response.

The `token limit` refers to the maximum number of tokens that the model can process in a single request. If we exceed this limit, the model won't be able to handle the request, resulting in an error. Each [model](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models) has a different limit, ranging from approximately 4,000 to 32,000 tokens. 

> We've found that [`gpt-3.5-turbo-16k`](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5) has the large limit (~16,000 tokens), while still being sufficiently fast and powerful for analyzing survey answers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [`gpt-3.5-turbo-16k`](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5) model we use has a large limit (~16,000 tokens), while still being sufficiently fast and powerful for analyzing survey answers. 
```

> This brings us to the question: **How many survey answers will we be able to batch and analyze at the same time? **

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This brings us to the question: **How many survey answers can we batch and analyze at the same time? **
```

> Using [tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer), a tool that counts the number of tokens in a string, we see that each of our survey answers are roughly `60 tokens`. Thus to estimate how many tokens each API request will use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using [tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer), a tool that counts the number of tokens in a string, we see that each survey answer is roughly `60 tokens`. Thus to estimate how many tokens each API request will use:
```

> 1. `60 tokens` for each survey answer requested to be analyzed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. `60 tokens` for each survey answer analysis request.
```

2. `120 token` for each response from ChatGPT (since each response includes the original survey answer, plus some extra text).

> So the total cost to analyze each survey answer will be approximately `180 tokens`. **This means we can batch at most `16,000 / 180 = 88` answers together**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the total cost to analyze each survey answer is approximately `180 tokens`. **This means we can batch at most `16,000 / 180 = 88` answers together**. 
```

To be extra safe and ensure we don't exceed this limit, we'll batch at most 50 answers together.

Let's update our code to do that:

- First we use a variable `batchSize = 50` in our `for-loop`. 

> - Next, we modify our `messages` argument to request ChatGPT to analyze many survey answers (instead of only one at a time). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Next, we modify our `messages` argument to request ChatGPT to analyze multiple survey answers (instead of only one at a time). 
```

              
              Here's an example of an valid answer: 
              \`\`\`
              [
                {
                  "survey_answer": "The product has potential, but it's not very intuitive to use. Please simplify the interface",
                  "sentiment": "negative",
                  "theme": "user interface",
                }
              ]
              \`\`\`
              `
          },
          {
            "role": "user", 
            "content": `Analyze these survey answer: ${JSON.stringify(batch.map(surveyAnswer => surveyAnswer.answer))}`
          }
        ],
      });

      const analyzedAnswers = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);
      analyzedAnswers.forEach(r => {
        const csvLine = `"${r.survey_answer}","${r.sentiment}","${r.theme}"\n`;
        fs.appendFile('analyzed_answers.csv', csvLine, (err) => {
          if (err) throw err;
          console.log('The analyzed answer was appended to file!');
        });
      });
    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
  }
}

// rest of code...
```

> Now if you run `node survey-analyzer.js`, ChatGPT will analyze 50 survey answers at a time!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now if you run `node survey-analyzer.js`, ChatGPT analyzes 50 survey answers at a time.
```

> ## Analyzing results in Excel or Google Sheets

Reviewer: This would be a great spot to do the analysis in PostHog 😄

> Now that we've analyzed our survey answers, we can import them into excel or Google sheets and visualize them. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we've analyzed our survey answers, we can import them into Excel or Google Sheets to visualize them. 
```

For example, you can create a [pivot table](https://support.microsoft.com/en-gb/office/create-a-pivottable-to-analyze-worksheet-data-a9a84538-bfe9-40a9-a8e9-f99134456576) to find the most common themes in the survey answers. You can do this by:

1. Importing `analyzed_answers.csv` in your sheet. Then, insert a new row at the top of the sheet so you can name the columns `answer`, `sentiment` and `theme`.
2. Clicking on the "Insert" tab, then "Pivot table".
3. Select the data range of your results.
4. In your pivot table editor, select `theme` in both the `Rows` and `Value` field. 
5. Lastly, sort by descending `COUNTA of theme`.

You should now see a sorted list of the most common themes in your survey answers.

![How to create a pivot table to analyze survey results](../images/tutorials/analyze-surveys-with-chatgpt/create-pivot-table.mp4)

> ## Reducing duplicate themes

Reviewer: Good section 😄

> You may have noticed that some of the themes suggested by ChatGPT may be very similar to others. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have noticed that some of the themes suggested by ChatGPT are similar, but not the same, as others. 
```

In the script we:

1. Extract the themes analyzed by ChatGPT from `analyzed_answers.csv`.
2. Send this list of themes to ChatGPT and ask it aggregate it, thus reducing the number of similar themes.
3. Use the response from ChatGPT to update similar themes in `analyzed_answers.csv`

Altogether, this looks like this:

```js
// in reduce-themes.js
const fs = require('fs');
const csv = require('csv-parser');
const OpenAI = require("openai");

const openai = new OpenAI({
  apiKey: "<your-api-key>"
});

const csvToArr = async (filePath) => {
  const results = [];
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    fs.createReadStream(filePath)
      .pipe(csv({ headers: ['answer', 'sentiment', 'theme'] }))
      .on('data', data => results.push(data))
      .on('end', () => {
        resolve(results);
      })
      .on('error', error => {
        reject(error);
      });
  });
}

const reduceThemes = async () => {
  const analyzedAnswers = await csvToArr('analyzed_answers.csv')  
    try {
      const themes = new Set(analyzedAnswers.map(answer => answer.theme))
      const result = await openai.chat.completions.create({

>         model: "gpt-4",

Reviewer: Different model?

                  "user roles and permissions": "user permissions",
                  "integration": "integrations",
                  "integrations": "integrations",
                }
              \`\`\`
              `
          },
          {
            "role": "user", 
            "content": `Aggregate these themes: ${JSON.stringify(Array.from(themes))}`
          }
        ],
      });
      const newThemes = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);

      // update the previously analyzed answers with the new themes
      const updatedAnswers = analyzedAnswers.map(old => {
        const updatedAnswer = old
        updatedAnswer.theme = newThemes[old.theme]
        return updatedAnswer
      })

      // overwrite the current contents of analyzed_answers.csv with the updated answers
      const lines = analyzedAnswers.map(r => `"${r.answer}","${r.sentiment}","${r.theme}"`).join('\n');
      fs.writeFile('analyzed_answers.csv', lines, (err) => {
        if (err) throw err;
        console.log('All analyzed answers were written to file!');
      });

    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
}

reduceThemes()
```

> Now, running `node reduce-themes.js` will aggregate similar themes. If you re-import your list in Google sheets or excel and create a pivot table, you should see fewer themes!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, running `node reduce-themes.js` will aggregate similar themes. If you re-import your list in Google Sheets or Excel and create a pivot table, you should see fewer themes.
```

---
title: How to analyze surveys with ChatGPT

> date: 2023-11-02

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2023-11-08
```

Add the CSV file to your project folder. Then, install [`csv-parser`](https://github.com/mafintosh/csv-parser) – a handy library for parsing CSVs.

```bash
npm install csv-parser
```

Next, add the following code to convert the CSV into an array:

```js
// in survey-analyzer.js

const fs = require('fs');
const csv = require('csv-parser');

const csvToArr = async (filePath) => {
  const results = [];
  return new Promise((resolve, reject) => {
    fs.createReadStream(filePath)
      .pipe(csv({ headers: ['answer', 'timestamp', 'person'] })) // your CSV header names
      .on('data', data => results.push(data))
      .on('end', () => {
        resolve(results);
      })
      .on('error', error => {
        reject(error);
      });
  });
}

const analyzeSurveyAnswers = async () => {
  const surveyAnswers = await csvToArr('answers.csv')
}

analyzeSurveyAnswers()
```

## Analyzing answers with ChatGPT

The next step is to submit our answers to ChatGPT to analyze them. To do this, first you'll need to [sign up for an OpenAI account](https://platform.openai.com/signup) and [retrieve your API key](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/4936850-where-do-i-find-my-secret-api-key). 

> Then, install [OpenAI's Node library ](https://github.com/openai/openai-node) and initialize it in the code. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, install [OpenAI's Node library](https://github.com/openai/openai-node) and initialize it in the code. 
```

```bash
npm install openai
```

```js
// in survey-analyzer.js

const OpenAI = require("openai");

const openai = new OpenAI({
    apiKey: "<your-api-key>"
});

// rest of the code
```

> Next, for each survey answer, we'll make an API call to [chat completions API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) to extract the following information:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, for each survey answer, we'll make a call to the [chat completions API](https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/gpt/chat-completions-api) to extract the following information:
```

> 1. Whether the sentiment is positive or negative?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Whether the sentiment is positive or negative.
```

                "theme": "user interface"
              }
              \`\`\`
              `
          },
          {
            "role": "user", 
            "content": `Analyze this survey answer: ${JSON.stringify(surveyAnswer.answer)}`
          }
        ],
      });

      const analyzedAnswer = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);
    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
  }
}
```

Finally, we'll save the answer from ChatGPT into a CSV file. This way we can analyze the results later:

```js
const analyzeSurveyAnswers = async () => {
    // rest of function code...

      const analyzedAnswer = JSON.parse(result.choices[0].message.content);
      const csvLine = `"${analyzedAnswer.survey_answer}","${analyzedAnswer.sentiment}","${analyzedAnswer.theme}"\n`;
      fs.appendFile('analyzed_answers.csv', csvLine, (err) => {
        if (err) throw err;
        console.log('The analyzed answer was appended to file!');
      });
    } catch (error) {
      console.log(`An error occurred: ${error}`)
    }
  }
}
```

If you now run `node survey-analyzer.js`, you should see your analyzed answers appear in your new CSV file.

> ## Batching our requests

Reviewer: Just trying to shorten this section down a bit, I think it is useful information, but we don't need to go into so much depth.

Since we submit each survey answer one at a time, it can be quite tedious waiting for the script to complete. To improve this, we can batch our survey answers so we analyze multiple at the same time. 

> However, an important consideration is that ChatGPT has something called a `token limit`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The only constraint is the ChatGPT model `token limit`:
```

> A `token` can be thought of as roughly 4 characters or 0.75 words. When you make an API request, the text in the `messages` parameter is converted into tokens. The response from the API is then also converted into tokens. 
> 
> This means that the number of tokens in your API call is number tokens in your request plus the number of tokens in the response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `token` can be thought of as roughly 4 characters or 0.75 words. When you make an API request, the text in the `messages` parameter and the response from the API are converted into tokens. This means that the number of tokens in your API call is number tokens in your request plus the number of tokens in the response.
```

The `token limit` refers to the maximum number of tokens that the model can process in a single request. If we exceed this limit, the model won't be able to handle the request, resulting in an error. Each [model](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models) has a different limit, ranging from approximately 4,000 to 32,000 tokens. 

The [`gpt-3.5-turbo-16k`](https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-3-5) model we use has a large limit (~16,000 tokens), while still being sufficiently fast and powerful for analyzing survey answers. 

This brings us to the question: **How many survey answers can we batch and analyze at the same time? **

> Using [tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer), a tool that counts the number of tokens in a string, we see that each survey answer is roughly `60 tokens`. Thus to estimate how many tokens each API request will use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using [tokenizer](https://platform.openai.com/tokenizer), a tool that counts the number of tokens in a string, we see that each survey answer is roughly `60 tokens` and each response is about `120 tokens`.
```

Reviewer: I don't think they need more details then this.

> 1. `60 tokens` for each survey answer request.
> 2. `120 token` for each response from ChatGPT (since each response includes the original survey answer, plus some extra text).
> 
> So the total cost to analyze each survey answer is approximately `180 tokens`. **This means we can batch at most `16,000 / 180 = 88` answers together**. 
> 
> To be extra safe and ensure we don't exceed this limit, we'll batch at most 50 answers together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So the total cost to analyze each survey answer is approximately `180 tokens`. **This means we can batch at most `16,000 / 180 = 88` answers together**. To be extra safe and ensure we don't exceed this limit, we'll batch at most 50 answers together.
```
